# A Multi-stage Network for Respiratory Disease Detection and Severity Assessment from Chest X-ray
Chest radiography (CXR) is a commonly used imaging modality for various respiratory disease screenings. It plays a crucial role in monitoring the progression of the disease, allocating limited medical resources, and planning treatment in daily clinical practice. However, the manual screening process for CXR images is time-intensive and prone to human error. Thus, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) is an additional decision-maker for medical professionals. Even though previous studies achieved impressive success in respiratory disease detection tasks, localizing the infection and quantifying its severity remains challenging, which limits the generalizability and interpretability of CAD-based models. This work presents a multi-stage architecture for lung region segmentation, disease classification, infection localization, and severity assessment using CXR datasets. In particular, we have utilized three segmentation models for lung region segmentation and ensemble the outcomes to extract the region of interest at the first stage. In the second stage, we proposed an ensemble technique with three pre-trained classifiers. The last stage of the network identifies the infection regions, calculates the amount of infection, and assigns a score (0–3) based on the severity of the infection. Based on the predicted scores, the infected images are categorized into four different severity levels, such as mild, moderate, severe, and critical. We have validated the proposed architecture using three common respiratory diseases, which can be extended to other respiratory diseases. The proposed lung segmentation model outperforms all the other individual segmentation models, with an IoU score of 98.66\% and a dice score of 99.32\%. Our proposed architecture achieves an accuracy of 98.15\% with an F1-score of 97.89\% and outperforms the existing baselines and state-of-the-art approaches in the literature. The experiment on the one external dataset achieves an accuracy of 97.16\% with an F1-score of 97.84\%, validating the proposed model's robustness. The implementation details and the curated dataset can be found at~\url{https://github.com/Pranabiitp/Multi-stage_Respiratory-Disease-Detection}.
